The network Lionesses of Africa hosted its last event of the year in Johannesburg, encouraging women entrepreneurs to connect and inspire each other. The network also shared some of its successes. Melissa Javan During its birthday celebrations in November, online network Lionesses of Africa announced it had launched a radio show. The show, hosted by Lionesses of Africa founder Melanie Hawken, interviews women from all over Africa about their entrepreneurship journeys. The Lionesses of Africa has a network of 500 000 women entrepreneurs from 49 countries across the continent, says Hawken. On Thursday 23 November 2017, the network hosted its last event in Johannesburg – a LeanIn Breakfast. “This [event] is where we inspire each other,” Hawken said. “This is where we get together to talk, especially when days are tough.” Speaking about the radio show, Hawken said it touches on how the women interviewed build their businesses, lose their businesses. “We also celebrate each other.” The show is powered by Standard Bank. Another success Lionesses of Africa has achieved is the hosting of African Startup Nights in countries beyond Africa. “We take five women entrepreneurs to these African Startup Nights to pitch their businesses to investors, partners and retailers.” The most recent event took place in Berlin, Germany. The network is already planning the 2018 African Startup Nights for Germany, the United Kingdom and France. Speakers at the LeanIn Breakfast included Standard Bank’s Dipuo Phakathi, Kathryn Main, founder of the Money Savvy Kids, Ngwana Matloa, co-founder of Abot Technology, Deborah Hartung, founder of People Pivot Tech, and Raksha Mahabeer, co-founder of Summertime. Each gave a motivational talk, explaining their entrepreneurial journeys including the hard lessons they had learnt on the way. Here are some of the gems the speakers shared: Raksha Mahabeer Mahabeer, who co-founded Summertime in 2007 with Sandhya Singh, described their entrepreneurial journey as a beautiful one. “As an entrepreneur it’s important to understand where you going,” she said. Mahabeer said, as a business owner, it was important to know your strengths and weaknesses. For a long time she did not own her title, even if she knew and fulfilled the responsibilities of the title, Mahabeer said. She highlighted the business aspects of finance, operations, productions, marketing and human resources. “Get real with yourself,” Mahabeer advised. “Get real about what you are skilled at and where you need to outsource.” Other lessons she shared included: Ngwana Matloa Matloa founded tech company Abot Technology with a university friend. She worked in corporate structures for seven to 10 years and what she learnt during that time was that clients did not always get what they asked for. “I hated that clients didn’t get what they wanted. Then it was the developer’s job to fix the situation.” Her company wants to change the perception around tech companies. “Tech is not difficult. We want to teach customers to understand data and help them collect it. Also, we wanted to start developing our own products and solve our own problems.” Lessons she learned include: Source: Lionesses of Africa Would you like to use this article in your publication or on your website? See Using Brand South Africa material.