The finalists in the South African Premier Business Awards were announced, by the Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies where he also confirmed that the fifth annual gala event will be held on 30 January 2018. Melissa Javan The finalists in the 10 categories in the fifth annual South African Premier Business Awards were announced in Johannesburg on Monday, 20 November 2017, at the JSE. The awards are hosted in partnership with the Department of Trade and Industry, Brand South Africa and Proudly South African. The winners will be announced at a gala event to be held on 30 January 2018, which will take the theme “Rewarding Business Excellence”. “The awards seek to recognise and celebrate entrepreneurs and companies that invest in both human and technical resources in various activities that are producing quality products and services,” Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies said in his keynote address. They recognised and honoured local enterprises that promoted the spirit of success, innovation, job creation, quality and good business ethics in South Africa’s business community. “They will also showcase the best that South Africa has to offer in terms of products and services made in South Africa.” The awards were not about winning money, the minister stressed; rather, it was about prestige – which the department hoped to increase. The finalists should be proud that they had reached this level of the competition. The sponsors of the South African Premier Business Awards are Tsogo Sun, the JSE (affiliate partner) and Wits Business School (academic partner). The prizes are: Thanking the sponsors, Davies said: “This is a sign that we can work together to make South Africa better.” There were 179 nominations this year. Investors Award Exporters Award Enterprise Development Support Award Manufacturers Award Black Industrialists Award SMME Award Young Entrepreneur Award Women-owned Business Award Proudly South African Enterprise Award Play Your Part Award Would you like to use this article in your publication or on your website? See Using Brand South Africa material.