Taking time to work on your curriculum vitae is worthwhile to get the job interview you want. Recruiters say there are a few simple steps to getting it right.Priya PitamberFirst-time job seekers and experienced professionals alike need a stand-out curriculum vitae (CV) document to be given a chance to interview for a job.Recruiters agree there are a few simple rules to follow when creating or updating a CV.We chat to a couple of them. Vanessa Raath is general manager at It s About People, a recruitment agency that focuses on the IT sector. Candice Clark is the founder of the Candice Clark Collective, a career-coaching practice.Raath has been in the industry for a decade, and is a host on the regular Monday afternoon Twitter chat #JobAdviceSA. Clarke hosts #CareerGirlCollab, a free online community.Here are their do s and don ts for putting together a great CV.Raath says this is entirely up to an individual. I personally do not think it is necessary as any hiring agency or prospective employer will just conduct a Google search to find a photo of you if they want to. Clark says while a photo can add a nice personal touch, it must be of professional quality. Use it on your front page, and think carefully about where to place it so that it flows nicely with the document, and doesn&#8217;t look randomly stuck on. She recommends an ID photo size.Raath describes job interviews as a necessary evil for anyone who is ambitious and is eager to build an amazing career.Both Raath and Clark agree that preparation is the key to successful interviews. Research the company and learn more about the role.Raath says ask for a job description to help you think of pertinent questions.Clark advises applicants to visualise a successful interview. Ensure you have had a good night s sleep prior, and arrive early with enough time to practice some deep breathing before your interview. Ask for a glass of water at the start of the interview. This will allow you to pause and take a sip of water when you need more time to think of an answer. Overall, honesty is important. Represent your experience, qualification and achievements honestly. You want a company and role that is right for you, says Clark.Would you like to use this article in your publication or on your website? See Using Brand South Africa material.