Episode 14 of the Play Your Part TV series features the Nosipho Community Foundation, the New Jerusalem Home for Children and the El Theos organisation. Tune in this evening, find out what they’re about and how you can play a part in their initiatives. There are numerous opportunities to get involved in improving the lives of those around you, be it through funding or offering your time and expertise helping organisations make a difference. On Episode 14 of the Play Your Part TV series, airing on Saturday at 6pm on SABC 2, we take a look at three organisations who have helped improve the lives of people living with difficult circumstances. Here’s more on two of the organisations featured, with ideas on how you can play your part: Nosipho Community Foundation Established in 2014 by Nosipho Ngcobo, the Nosipho Community Foundation serves as a sanctuary to homeless and destitute living in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. The foundation works with volunteers from across the country to help take care of the needs of vulnerable people in and around the city. Ngcobo and the rest of her team welcome anybody looking to make a difference and call on you to get involved. Those interested can have a look at the organisation’s website to get in touch or have a look at their Facebook page. New Jerusalem Home for Children Not far from Tembisa, Gauteng, is the New Jerusalem Home for Children, a faith-based non-profit organisation that has been home to more than 1 000 children since September 2000. The home not only offers shelter and nourishment, it also aims to develop the children into well-rounded adults through education, social and emotional support. Find out more about the organisation on its website or via its Facebook page. Join us Play Your Part is broadcast at 6pm on Saturdays on SABC2. To get involved in playing your part in South Africa: Check out the conversation on Twitter: #GetInvolved; or Find out about initiatives on Play Your Part here. Tell us how you Play Your Part through our social media channels: Follow us on Twitter: @PlayYourPartSA; Follow Brand South Africa on Twitter: @Brand_SA; Like us on Facebook: Official Brand South Africa.