Wondering whether the Employment Equity Act applies to you? Confused about how to implement employment equity in your company? Concerned about how to classify your employees in racial terms? Read on. Wondering whether the Employment Equity Act applies to you? Confused about how to implement employment equity in your company? Concerned about how to classify your employees in racial terms? Read on. Don’t panic. It’s all on the Department of Labour’s website. But first read this summary of the basic information and the steps you need to take. Affirmative action ensures that qualified people from designated groups have equal opportunities in the workplace. Designated groups are blacks (Africans, Coloureds and Indians), women and people with disabilities. All employers, workers and job applicants (except for members of the National Defence Force, National Intelligence Agency and South African Secret Service). Affirmative action provisions apply to employers who employ 50 or more staff members or whose annual turnover is more than that set down in Schedule 4 of the Act (the figures vary according to the type of industry). Employers must draw up an employment equity plan, setting out the steps they intend taking to achieve employment equity, over the next one to five years. To do this, they need to analyse their workforce profile as well as their employment practices and policies. In drawing up the plan they must consult with unions and employees to get agreement around it. Employers need to report their equity plans regularly to the Department of Labour, which monitors implementation. Employment equity plans must show: The Department of Labour recommends this is achieved in three phases: preparation (assign responsibility, set up consultative forum, analysis of employment practices and environment, draw up workforce profile); implementation (proactive steps to improve the company’s diversity profile); and monitoring. The Department of Labour is responsible for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of affirmative action. To do this, it needs to receive regular reports from companies on their progress. Regular reporting to the department is a legal requirement. Reports comprise two forms: the Employment Equity Report Form (EEA2) and the Income Differential Statement (EEA4). These can be submitted electronically or by hand to any labour centre. They can also be posted to: Employers with more than 150 employees must report every year by the first working day of October, while employers with fewer than 150 employees must report every year ending with an even number (ie every second year). Copies of the reports must be kept for at least three years for large employers, or two years for smaller employers. Employers who do not comply with legislation will be excluded from the department’s public register. Government and other companies are encouraged to do business with those on the register. Employees can report employers who do not comply with the equity legislation to the department. Employers who are unable to report must let the Department of Labour know in writing, giving reasons. Write to: The EEA1 form calls for voluntary self-classification on the part of the employee. If an employee refuses to fill this in the employer must rely on existing records of the employee, but must make sure that this information is made available to him/her. If an employee is “mixed race”, the designation he/she volunteers must be used. If the employer must make the choice, he/she is advised to put the employee in the “designated group” category – in other words, black. Once again, the EEA1 form calls for voluntary self-classification on the part of the employee. According to the Act, people with disabilities are defined as “people who have long-term or recurring physical or mental impairment which substantially limits their prospects of entering into, or advancement in, employment”. Yes, as long as they employ more than 50 people or meet the annual turnover requirement (see Schedule Four of the Act for this). These include: NGOs, trade unions, trusts, co-operatives, professional practices, sport codes and churches. Source: Brand South Africa reporter, with information from the Department of Labour Would you like to use this article in your publication or on your website? See Using Brand South Africa material.