The Partners for Possibility education initiative has been awarded sixth place at the HR.COM LEAD2017 awards, held in Nashville, Tennessee. The organisation was one of 200 in the running for the award.Mathiba MolefePartners for Possibility, the South African education development organisation, was awarded sixth place out of 200 in the category of Top Leadership Partner at the annual HR.COM LEAD2017 awards ceremony.Taking place in Nashville, Tennessee in US, the annual HR.COM awards are held to recognise the work being done in leadership development throughout the world by individuals and organisations such as Partners for Possibility (PFP).The HR.COM LEAD2017 awards ceremony was held during the LEAD2017 leadership forum on 7 and 8 February.Partners for PossibilityEducation is one of the most important factors in South Africa s development and improving the country s education system is one of the most pressing issues when it comes to securing its future.It was with this in mind that PFP was created, uniting some of the best business minds with teachers and principals from schools around the country.These partnerships were created to bring some of the best business practices to the running of the schools. The objective was to help these schools run more efficiently and ensure learners got the most out of their time there.By developing partnerships and leadership, the programme ensures that everybody involved benefits, from the business leader and principals to the children at the schools and the communities around them. What we have in this country is the most remarkable culture of active citizenship and citizens who actually stand up, who make a difference, who go out of their way to touch the lives of other people, said Robyn Whittaker, the stakeholder engagement lead at PFP. It s important that we showcase this as much as we can. Proud partnersHR.COM is not the only group to recognise the value of the work being done by PFP. Because of the great promise the organisation has, Brand South Africa has partnered with it.This budding venture is part of Brand South Africa s ongoing efforts to support the development of South Africa, which is made easier by supporting organisations that have already laid the groundwork.Stand up and be counted, get involvedIf you are inspired by what Partners for Possibility is doing and you feel like you need to play a part in helping it realise the goal of providing high-quality education, you can visit the organisation s website to find out more about how you can get involved.PFP aims to spread its influence as far as possible, facilitating more partnerships and paving the way for younger generations. If you want to become a partner, visit its Become a PFP web page to find out how you can do this.Play Your PartAre you playing your part to help improve the lives of those around you through your everyday actions? Do you know of anyone who deserves recognition for improving South Africa and its people?If you do, then submit your story to our website and let us know what you are doing to improve the country for all; we want to hear it.If we don t get actively involved in creating a better future for South Africa, then who will? Step up and play your part in our country s journey to greatness.Would you like to use this article in your publication or on your website? See Using Brand South Africa material.