KwaZulu-Natal has it all: a long coastline of beautiful beaches, rolling green midlands inland, a wealth of African culture, the magnificent Drakensberg range of mountains, and game reserves stocked with the Big Five all to be enjoyed with 320 days of sunshine a year. The Amphitheatre in the Drakensberg Mountains. The uKhahlamba-Drakensberg National Park is a Unesco World Heritage Site. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Compiled by Mary AlexanderA thriving tourism industry means South Africa is closer to achieving its National Development Plan goals of skills development and creating decent employment through inclusive economic growth.KwaZulu-Natal offers a heady mix of cultural, historical and natural attractions. Durban is a seaside city with Blue Flag beaches, and entertainment and activities of all kinds.The province also has deep and varied cultural heritage &#8211; once home to the legendary King Shaka, it has one of the largest Indian communities outside India, and a strong British colonial heritage. You&#8217;ll see this rich mix of cultures on the streets of Durban and Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal&#8217;s major cities. The Durban waterfront at sunset. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)A surfing lesson at Addington Beach in Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)A dolphin performs for tourists at uShaka Sea World, part of the uShaka Marine World development in Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Rolling sugarcane fields, a signature landscape of KwaZulu-Natal. (Image: Brand South Africa)Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban was built for the 2010 Fifa World Cup. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Bungee jumping from the roof of the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)The Nelson Mandela Capture Site, outside, commemorates the statesman&#8217;s arrest in August 1962 at a roadblock near the KwaZulu-Natal town of Howick. Mandela would spend the next 28 years in jail. He was released in February 1990. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)The Durban yacht basin, with the city&#8217;s central business district skyline behind. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)The historic city hall in Pietermaritzburg, the capital of KwaZulu-Natal. (Image: Brand South Africa)Traditional Zulu dancing. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)An Indian spice shop in Durban offers a range of delights. Durban has the country&#8217;s largest population of Indian South Africans, making it the largest &#8220;Indian&#8221; city outside of India itself. (Image: Brand South Africa)Panoramic view of the 18-hole golf course at the Champagne Sports Resort in the Central Drakensberg. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)A colourful mural at the Durban Snake and Reptile Park. (Image: Brand South Africa)A traditional homestead in Zululand. (Image: Brand South Africa)Karkloof Canopy Tours in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands takes visitors on a zipline adventure through the second-largest indigenous forest in South Africa. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)The beach and lighthouse in Umhlanga, north of Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Umhlanga pier, north of Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Schoolchildren get a lesson in the aquarium at uShaka Marine World in Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)Bioluminescent jellyfish in a display tank at the uShaka Marine World aquarium in Durban. (Image: South African Tourism, CC BY 2.0, via Flickr)